(upbeat music)
Let's get into writing some of our own
custom functions.
I wanna make a new folder in our playground,
and we'll call that custom dash functions.
And inside of that, we'll give ourselves an index HTML,
and a,
CS dot JS.
Custom CS,
not CS,
cf.js.
Console log,
it works,
go under HTML and give ourselves a HTML base.
We will need to modify this base.css,
because I made a folder.
So we'll go up two levels,
in order to get to it.
And then right before the closing body tag,
I'll get myself a script source,
to cf.js.
Open that sucker up,
and it should work,
it does.
The real power of JavaScript comes from,
when you wanna define your own functions.
Functions can do anything.
They're grouped together set of instructions,
often taking in values,
remember we talked about arguments earlier,
doing some work,
and then returning a new value or set of values,
to the person that requested it.
So we're going to be making a function called:
calculate Bill!
So calculateBill is this,
Western gentleman that I imagined,
that is very good at going to restaurants,
and calculating what the bill would be,
regarding how much the bill was,
how much tip was and how much tax is.
So, calculateBill,
what's that guy from Looney Tunes,
(sing song voice) looney tunes
this guy,
Yosemite Sam, that's what I imagine calculateBill to be.
Anyways, that's what we are going to be doing,
there's gonna be a few set of buzzwords
that will come through,
so sit tight and we'll explain that as we go through it.
So first one is functions are created or defined,
and then they are later called.
So there's two big,
this is a little bit distracting.
Functions are defined and called.
So when they're created,
when you make a function, when you author what it does,
that's called function definition.
And then later on,
when you wanna run that function,
that's called calling or running a function.
There are few different ways of ways to define a function,
we're gonna get into all of the different approaches
in the next couple of videos.
For now, let's show how like sort of the basic ways
to do it in JavaScript.
So the way that you define a function in JavaScript,
is you type: function,
and then you type the name of the function,
that you'd like to call it.
And this follows the exact same rules as variables,
so we don't need to cover that again.
And we're gonna call it calculateBill.
Now you'll see right here what I've done is,
I've defined it,
I've given it parenthesis, that's not calling it,
this is defining it,
and then you open and close what's called
a function block.
Now anything inside of here,
this is the function body,
and anything that goes inside of the actual function body,
is going to be part of the function.
So again, this is the definition of a function.
This is the name of the function,
and this is the block or the body of the function.
Now inside of a function,
we can obviously do things like,
console log, running,
calculate Bill.
Then to go ahead and run a function,
we simply just take the name of it,
actually look at this,
if I refresh it, and we see,
that we have calculateBill there,
it works just like a variable,
in that you can just call them by the name of it,
it's almost the exact same thing as a variable.
However, when you hit enter,
you actually see the code that is behind the function,
rather than the the actual the value in it.
Now if we're to go ahead and run that,
we could run it from the terminal here,
calculate,
Bill,
it says running Calculate Bill!
And then you see it's returned undefined.
We'll talk about that in just a second,
or we can go ahead and run it right from our JavaScript.
So, calculateBill,
right here,
and then when you refresh the page,
you see that it's immediately being run.
So, lets do some comments here,
this is a function definition,
and this is a,
function call,
or we often call it a Run of the function.
So we're running the function here.
Good.
Now let's talk about returning values,
so you notice that when we call calculateBill,
it does the work that we asked it to do,
and then it returns undefined,
and that's because often,
functions will do a bunch of work,
and then return to you,
the result.
Like in our case,
obviously what we're gonna do is,
we're gonna take in some arguments,
that is how much was the dinner,
what is the tax rate,
and how much do you feel like tipping on this meal,
and it's going to return to us,
the total value of that,
and that's exactly what we're looking for.
So the way that that works here,
is we'll say something like this:
const total, is equal to and we're going to assume
that the meal was a hundred dollars,
and we're going to multiply that by 1.13,
'cause where I live,
in Ontario,
the tax rate is 13 percent.
Then, if I were to,
like run this,
this is running calculate bill,
and I can console log total,
not total string,
total variable here,
and you can see that it's,
(laughter)
there we go again
with our floating issues,
we'll venture into that at a future time.
Ain't that funny,
100 dollars,
times 1.13,
is equal to,
112.9999,
that's just a perfect example of the issue
that we talked about earlier.
Anyways, we see this value here,
we see a 112, and you might be thinking,
like oh like oh,
now I have this nice total variable,
I can just quickly access it.
Total.
Total is not defined.
All right, maybe I can say
console log the total variable here.
And no,
total is not defined,
you see cf js is yelling at us,
and this is something
that we're gonna get into called scope,
meaning that inside of a function,
the variable is only available,
variables that are created inside of a function,
this is what is called block scoping,
and again we'll get much more into that in the future,
but it's not available outside of the function.
So the question is like okay,
like handy little function, but like how do I,
how do I store the result of this calculation,
in a variable,
so that I can access it either from my console,
or from somewhere out here,
and that is with returning.
So you'll remember that when we called calculateBill,
we see that there is undefined returned,
okay.
But,
I can't access it,
so what we actually need to do,
is from the function,
we will return, so this is a keyword in JavaScript,
it's just the word return
and then you return the actual variable that you want,
so we'll say total.
Now, when I run this function here,
calculateBill,
you'll see that it does console log it,
that's because I'm console logging it here,
maybe get rid of that,
but it also does return the actual value.
So this is a handy little function,
that
when you run it,
will do some calculation,
and return a value.
Now the question is: how do I store this value,
again my total variable is still not available to me,
so I console log total variable here,
it's still not available to me,
and that's because,
we have to capture,
so it's another sort of,
buzzword that we'll have here.
We need to capture the result,
of a function,
or we need to capture the returned value of the function,
into a variable.
So in front of this calculateBill,
we'll say const my total,
is equal to calculateBill,
and then we'll console log my total.
And take a look,
for my total,
you'll see that we actually now have access to the my total,
and we can do something like this:
your total is,
dollar sign,
and we're gonna interpolate my total,
obviously we're gonna have this right here,
and it's 112 dollars,
and 999999 cents.
We'll go into how to actually fix that in the future.
So couple of things we need to review here real quick.
This variable right here, total,
and this variable right here,
you might be asking like,
like why do we have two variables for the exact same value?
And that's because this is what is referred to,
as a temporary variable.
Meaning that this variable,
because it has been created inside of this function,
it is only ever available,
inside of this function,
and when the function is done running,
that variable is cleaned up,
or what is called garbage collected in JavaScript,
and it's no longer needed.
So that's just a variable that's only ever
inside of this one function,
when it's run,
and then it is gone.
So if you ever want to capture
the value of this calculateBill,
you have to stick it into a variable,
before you can go ahead,
and display it.
Or you could do something like this,
we would do another console.log and we say:
your total is,
and what is kind of cool about this interpolation strings,
with back text,
is you can actually run,
functions right inside of it.
So, since calculateBill will return a value,
JavaScript is actually gonna run that function first,
and then whatever the return result,
it's gonna immediately get interpolated
into this string.
Now I comment that one out,
and it should give us,
yeah it gives us the exact same,
little run that we have here,
and it interpolates that right into the value.